---
title: 'Ode to My Frayed Nerves: Exploring Physical Trauma through Gestural
Control'
author: 
    - name: Sophie Rose
      affiliation: Australian Institute of Music and University of Melbourne
      city: Melbourne
      country: Australia
      email: iceadj@gmail.com
author-header: S. Rose
abstract: |
  Ode to My Frayed Nerves is a composition for technology, extended vocal
  techniques such as overtone singing and growling, and gesture. The work
  sonically explores the sensations that occur in my left hand due to a
  physical trauma. This paper discusses how these sensations are realised
  sonically, implementation of the MiMu system (MI.MU Gloves Ltd, 2010)
  and accompanying performance gestures, and how it has shaped the
  creative output and immersion in the activity and sound environment. The
  piece explores how a physical trauma may be expressed through an
  immersive sound performance.

  The exploration is grounded in embodiment studies, which discuss the
  intertwining perceptions of the brain, body, and objects in actions, and
  performative autoethnography to document the interactions. Preliminary
  conclusions yield that the glove-based gestural sound manipulation of
  voice can encourage or enable an embodied experience, but it can be
  fleeting due to sensor drift, rigorous preparation demands, and
  performance variabilities. However, the ability to paint and malleate a
  sound environment without physically touching a computer is powerful and
  absorbing activity.
anonymous: 'false'
bibliography: 'references'
papersize: a4
classoption: 12pt
secnumdepth: 3
reference-section-title: 'References'
year: 2023
volume: 39
number: 1
article-no: 2
date: '2021-10-31'
accepted-date: '2023-04-19'
published-date: 'YYYY-MM-DD'
keywords: 'embodiment; gestural control; technologically mediated voice; extended vocal techniques'
---

# Introduction  {#introduction .First-Level-Headings}

*Ode to My Frayed Nerves* is a composition for technology, extended
vocal techniques such as overtone singing and growling, and gesture. The
work sonically explores the sensations that occur in my left hand due to
a physical trauma. This paper discusses how these sensations are
realised sonically, implementation of the *MiMu* system (MI.MU Gloves
Ltd, 2010) and accompanying performance gestures, and how it has shaped
the creative output and immersion in the activity and sound environment.

The work was composed for my doctoral thesis which investigates the
bridge between voice and technology through embodiment, which in simple
terms is the intertwining perceptions of the brain, body, and objects in
actions. The compositions for the larger body of work centre on
traumatic experience(s) and how they may be expressed and (re)negotiated
through sound, voice, and gesture. The aim for the larger study is to
enhance the connection between the mind and body and exploit the
psychological feedback loop that this creates in composition and
performance.

# Framing {#framing .First-Level-Headings}

The piece explores how a physical trauma may be expressed through an
immersive sound performance. The hands are the site of the injury, and
the hands shape the vocal output through looping and effects. The *MiMu*
interface is hand-based and thus aligns with the focus on the hands. The
near universal possession of hand(s) gives the potential for empathetic
connections with the artwork due to the hands' sensitive structure and
intertwinement with the human experience. Languageless voice is used
because in traumatic situations the function of Broca's and Wernicke's
areas (which control speech production and comprehension (Kolk, 2014;
Levine, 2015)) are impaired. By utilising the internal experience of my
nerve damage, I simulate an experience based on a cumulation of
first-person experienced data and then express it externally using
voice.

Practice-based research methods fuel this project and other research
methods are used to support and develop the given problem, be it
aesthetic, or technical (Candy, 2006; Sullivan, 2009). As with the work
of Höök (2018) and Mainsbridge (2018), this exploration is rooted in
embodiment studies and attempts to holistically deepen the user's
engagement in a technologically mediated activity. I frame the work
through an performative autoethnographic, and therefore also écriture
féminine, lens to document the interactions and assist in fleshing out
the academic canon to normalise and diversify non-masculine perspectives
and experiences (Spry, 2011; Stojanović, 2015).

Making is an essential part of practice and research as an artist
(Mäkelä, 2007). Research in the arts melds practice with abstraction of
knowledge and meaning contained in the art and/or the process of making.
Donald Schön (1983) proposed that research ought to be geared towards an
understanding of the nature and origin of knowledge, which is tied to
the practice from knowing through making. The artist, or practitioner,
learns and understands the world through the artefacts they create and
the process of making. In exposing one's trauma for an audience and
including the bodily knowledge within both the practice and performance
of a work I operate in performative autoethnography. The body, the
music, and the writing are linked aspects of knowledge. The inclusion of
implicit knowledge and explication of personal experiences is analysed
through society in a critical narrative.

Embodiment studies discuss the intertwining perceptions of the brain,
body, and objects in actions. The inclusion of bodily knowledge is
essential to experientially focused artwork and experimentation. If an
experience is the cumulation of sensory data resolving into a unity,
then we must include past experiences in our exploration in the present
and perception of an experience. Dewey likened experiencing to breathing
in the rhythmic intake and output and conscious experience requires
engagement with the body in combination with this rhythmic process and
fulfilment of an aesthetic event (Dewey, 1934). In this discussion I
look at the interplay of unified mind-body absorption in the activity,
technology, and the artwork.

# Slice {#slice .First-Level-Headings}

Seemingly small traumas may have diverse and long-lasting effects. They
may be far deeper and more significant than even a medical professional
could realise, though seeming superficial.

## Storytime {#storytime .Second-Level-Headings}

I was already in shock when I got to the doctors last June. I had been
cleaning up my electronics workstation and had slipped catastrophically
with the utility knife. I remember cleaning. I remember having it in my
hand. And then I was looking down at blood pouring out of my hand. I
called to Cloud (partner) and said I need to go to the doctors. Now. I
made Cloud put my mask on me while I tried to hold the skin together and
put pressure on the area. All the while blood continued to seep between
my fingers.

The doctor rushed me in, cleaned the external wound, and injected my
hand with an anesthetic. I did not feel the needle. This should have
been a clue. The doctor proceeded to clean out the wound and then held
his breath and went still. He asked me to move my hand, and then each of
my fingers. I had missed the tendon by around a millimeter. Functioning
seemed normal, so he continued cleaning. At one point the tugging of the
cleaning process caused an electric shock through my hand and I gasped
and jerked. The doctor stitched me up and sent me on my way.

I could not use my hand for about a month. Over time I discovered that I
could no longer feel most of my pinky finger and I had a pins and
needles sensations on the outer edge of my palm above the cut. To this
day I have loss of sensation in parts of my hand. I no longer feel the
texture of things, just a confusing mishmash of nerve static that refers
to unlikely places. When the area is touched, electrical signals fire in
my hand in the wrong places. If the touch is unexpected, I go
momentarily blind, in that I can only "see" the sensation. My pinky
finger is weaker, easily fatigued, and no longer as dexterous. It's
worse on hot days when the body retains water (almost impossibly so
given the sweltering Melbourne heat). Most of the time it is merely
annoying, but when the cat licked my scar\... It was akin to old science
fiction movies and warp speed, but with less hyper-speed travel and no
crew to strap in with.

## Make It Sound {#make-it-sound .Second-Level-Headings}

*An audio-visual recording is set to be filmed in February 2023. This
audio has been bounced as an audio only experience and does not
completely represent the live version. Please follow the link for a
stereo or surround version of this piece:*

Stereo bounce:
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/1FH-GCqk6QCR6ePWUtF3p0570Gew6NuDs/view?usp=sharing>

Surround bounce:
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/1CofF9JBd4bZqKdW3imedaPvoi4zzyYwb/view?usp=sharing>

This piece uses the technologically mediated female voice and extended
vocal techniques drawn from contemporary, experimental, and non-Western
influences and manipulate my voice with a glove-based gestural control
interface (MiMu). This piece can be performed by other singers, however,
due to the inaccessibility and inflexible sizing of gesture-based
wearable controllers, I am the sole performer currently. Gesture data is
fed through proprietary software called *Glover* (MI.MU Gloves Ltd,
2022) and into *Ableton Live* (Ableton, 2021) to process the voice in a
variety of ways, including looping, distorting, granularising, and
spatialising around a quadraphonic, binaural, or other surround sound
format immersive sound environment. I wrote, recorded, and performed the
work in a quadraphonic environment using the *Max for Live* addon
*Surround Panner* (Ableton, 2020) with four channels of audio sent
through the auxiliary channels, thus the audio format configuration is
flexible to suit different venues. Hand gestures manipulate the audio
and gestural relationships with sound were selected through a mixture of
practicality and symbolism. For example, the fist gesture grabs a sound
and horizontal arm movements change its position in the sonic
environment. This draws on the well understood concept of grabbing and
moving something with one's hand.

The piece aims to reflect the current physical situation of my hand
injury and intends to convey a simplified version of the journey from
normal functioning to injury. The piece does this primarily through the
vocal line which builds by layering live vocal loops which ascend
chromatically. There are 14 total loops. At the start, only the live
acoustic voice is audible. An automated filter on all audio output
gradually opens the audible frequencies over time from inaudible (100Hz
for most female voices) to audible frequencies. As the pitch rises
overtones and undertones, and other solo multiphonic singing techniques
are incorporated. A pre-recorded voice sings a G with a tongue trill and
functions as a timekeeping device. This sound can be heard around the
five, ten, 15, and 20 minute marks. The pitches stack chromatically with
specified extended vocal techniques as shown in Table 1. With the
addition of effects, the sound becomes a wall of noise over time due to
the dense layering of processed vocals.

After 14 minutes, the filter opens past 10,000Hz and the audio quality
is degraded through fuzz and grain delay effects, becoming a fuzzy
noise, like dialing into television static. Closed fist hand gestures
"pick up" the sound which can then be moved, effected, and placed in the
quadraphonic audio environment. A button cycles through which fist
gesture is controlling what vocal loop. This control provides
instability and unpredictability, as well as a sense of movement and
being surrounded through the sound moving around the speaker setup. I
use this to allude to the physical damage which my body has tried to
knit back together and failed. The threads go together in unexpected
ways and the body does not mend correctly. Further gesture routing is
contained in Table 2.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Loop**   **Pitch**   **Vocal Technique**
  ---------- ----------- ----------------------------------------------------------
  1          N/A         Egressive and ingressive vocal fry (rumble/grumble)

  2          Eb          Egressive Eb with undertone singing and ingressive fry

  3          E           Ingressive E and egressive fry

  4          F -- Gb     Egressive and ingressive phonation on DZH sound,
                         alternating between pitches

  5          G           Egressive and ingressive phonation

  6          Ab          Egressive and ingressive phonation (loops 6 -- 14 with
                         overtone singing)

  7          A           Egressive and ingressive phonation with overtone singing

  8          Bb          Egressive and ingressive phonation

  9          B           Egressive and ingressive phonation

  10         C -- Db     Egressive and ingressive phonation, alternating between
                         pitches

  11         D           Egressive and ingressive phonation

  12         Eb          Egressive and ingressive phonation

  13         E           Egressive and ingressive phonation

  14         F           Egressive and ingressive phonation
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Pitch and vocal technique assignment for the live recorded
  vocal loops.

After the loops have been recorded, there is space for improvisation.
First by affecting the sound through the gesture and placing sounds in
the quadraphonic environment. Secondly through two melodic phrases
(rhythm is at the discretion of the performer) using harmonic minor and
double harmonic scale in any comfortable range, with and without
overtone singing. The phrases are 1, 3, b2, 1/8, b6, 5, 7, 8/1 and 8, 5,
b7, 7, 4, 3, 8, b9.

The larger context of this piece is ways of expressing trauma, which is
a deeply personal experience, to an audience in a way that is evocative
and honest. It is also to demonstrate the affordances of technology to
enhance and extend the voice and express instances of trauma where
language does not ordinarily preside or take precedence.

## Assigning Meaning {#assigning-meaning .Second-Level-Headings}

For this work, *Ableton Live*, *MiMu*, and *Glover* capture and
interpret data to create the electronic sound components. The *MiMu*
gloves use flexible sensors, a button, accelerometer, gyroscope, and
magnetometer sensor to capture movement data and transmits data over
WIFI where it is translated by *Glover* and output to one\'s digital
audio workstation of choice. It can provide user feedback through LED's
and/or vibration feedback on the gloves.

+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| **Gesture**        | **Routing**                                     |
+====================+=================================================+
| Button L           | Next Scene                                      |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Device Feedback: Assign glove LED Colour        |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| Button R           | Previous Scene                                  |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Device Feedback: Assign glove LED Colour        |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH Fist + Yaw      | Vocal effect control (7 total, one for each     |
|                    | "scene" in Glover)                              |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH Fist + Pitch    | Vocal effect control (7 total)                  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH Fist + Roll     | Vocal effect control (7 total)                  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH Fist + Yaw      | Vocal effect control (7 total)                  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH Fist + Pitch    | Vocal effect control (7 total)                  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH Fist + Roll     | Vocal effect control (7 total)                  |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH 1-Finger Point  | Start Loop Record 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, or 13      |
| Up +               |                                                 |
|                    |                                                 |
| RH 1-Finger Point  |                                                 |
| Down               |                                                 |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH Open Hand Up +  | Stop Loop Record 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, or 13       |
|                    |                                                 |
| RH Open Hand Down  | Device Feedback: Assign glove LED Colour        |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Haptic Feedback: Strong Vibration (LH)          |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| RH 1-Finger Point  | Start Loop Record 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, or 14.    |
| Up +               |                                                 |
|                    |                                                 |
| LH 1-Finger Point  |                                                 |
| Down               |                                                 |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| RH Open Hand Up +  | Stop Loop Record 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, or 14      |
|                    |                                                 |
| LH Open Hand Down  | Device Feedback: Assign glove LED Colour        |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Haptic Feedback: Strong Vibration (RH)          |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH Fist            | Select Track 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, or 13           |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| RH Fist            | Select Track 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, or 14          |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH Wrist Flick     | Clear Loop 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, or 13             |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Haptic Feedback: Strong Vibration (LH)          |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| RH Wrist Flick     | Clear Loop 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, or 14            |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Haptic Feedback: Strong Vibration (RH)          |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH Open Hand       | Device Feedback: Assign glove LED Colour        |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| RH Open Hand       | Device Feedback: Assign glove LED Colour        |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH & RH Pinch + LH | All loop track volumes                          |
| Pitch              |                                                 |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| LH & RH 1-Finger   | Stop all loop playback                          |
| Point Down         |                                                 |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+

: Gesture assignment and device feedback in *Glover* (for
*MiMu*).

The overarching filter is automated with several steps in the steepness
of the curve going from a low pass filter from 200Hz to 20,000Hz. There
are seven scenes, and so fourteen possible loops. The loops pair in
twos, so 1 & 2, 3 & 4, et cetera. The performer records one loop at a
time and then places it within the surround (or binaural, for headphone
performance) sound environment by the spatial location of the hand. See
Table 2 for basic gesture routing.

Easily remembered gestures that are pre-laden with meaning have been
chosen for preference. This makes it easier for the performer to switch
between different gesture interfaces with similar abilities or
configuration and communicate the function of a gesture to the audience.
Some gestures are commonplace, or conducting gestures, for example,
volume up/down is taken from conducting gestures (it may also be seen in
education settings for shushing excited children). Other assignments
were more challenging, for example, loop start/stop. These mapping
assignments have a personal logic, but it is more contrived. The logical
thought for my practice is: "I have an idea!" (index finger pointing
upward) to "Stop" (open palm + up).

The yaw (side to side on a flat plane), pitch (up/down as an angle in
relation to the floor), and roll (side to side around the front to back
axis of the microcontroller) movement whilst holding a closed fist hand
position manipulates audio effects and spatialization of each loop. This
grants a tactile and visual representation of grabbing a sound to twist
and shape it. The manipulation and effects routing leave room for
improvisation within a set piece, enabling free flow between
choreographed and improvised sections, to allow the performer freedom to
immerse themselves in the sound.

# Theatre versus "Real Life"  {#theatre-versus-real-life .First-Level-Headings}

Thembi Soddell (2019) notes that trauma is felt well after the event is
in the past, often without a direct connection to the initial event.
This piece is an artistic interpretation of the sensations that arise
when an area of the body with nerve damage is touched, not specifically
of the accident (the slicing and dicing, *see Storytime*). The narrative
is the physical healing journey; the progression from no feeling to
confused, sporadic feelings, swelling, and random electrical noise
circulating through the area. This pitch splitting of the voice through
extended techniques and the automated filter are used to reference the
split skin and the frayed nerves. Over time, the wall of noise
diminishes and there are small gaps where only the live acoustic voice
is audible. And as the final swelling recedes, the electrical noise dims
and silences. The hands tell the story, which is apt given the hands are
the site of the injury. As a musician and maker, my hands are strongly
connected to my identity as a person and what I do as an artist. It is
also interesting from the perspective of healing. We ordinarily think of
healing as being a journey from broken or ill, to "back to normal". With
trauma that may not be possible, and instead an unfair expectation on
the experiencer. Even considering the incredible plasticity of the
brain, sometimes the best a traumatized person might hope for is to
craft a life that is satisfying whilst embracing the chaos to find
peace.

Placing the sound in space by the act of grasping by a closing of the
fist is something that can be easily understood by an audience.
Movements need to be performed in a more exaggerated way to ensure the
message is clear for the audience. Having one neutral position (where
the sound was not being actively altered) was an important lesson to
learn as a composer-performer. My neutral position was open palm any
position except "open palm + up". This neutral stance provides space for
me to listen to the soundscape and locate the next compositional input
and/or prepare the next fixed sequence. Without a neutral position,
every movement must be deliberate as all movement changes the sound. A
lack of neutral posture hinders the likelihood of the performer becoming
immersed in the activity which obstructs feelings of embodiment.

We do not yet have a generalized performance gesture language or
ingrained understanding of how movement follows sound in this
performance context (Mainsbridge, 2016). Additionally, as Jane Davidson
notes there are three streams of movement used in performance --
biomechanical, individual, and culturally-specific (Davidson & Salgado
Correia, 2001). A performer may wish to draw from all or any of these
categories to frame their performance. Layman experience with
(technologically mediated) gestural-sound illustration is based in the
same sets of movements seen in representations in films like *Frozen*
(Buck et al., 2013), or perhaps shamanist rituals as shown in
documentaries where the sound accompanies the gestures evoking natural
phenomena or animals. In Frozen, the main character Elsa's magic comes
out of her hands and is accompanied by sound in soundtrack and as foley.
While the use of technology can expand our expressive capabilities,
there may be no general framework to decipher, and solutions may be
artist-by-artist centric. In the meantime, there remains a mystic
quality for an audience based on audience feedback I have received.

# Evaluating the interface for purpose  {#evaluating-the-interface-for-purpose .First-Level-Headings}

In some ways the system is very user friendly and in others it can be an
extra chore to stop you from composing. The price of the system makes it
inaccessible for most practitioners and inhibited me from experimenting
vigorously for fear of damaging the interface. The gloves must be
connected to a digital audio workstation, such as *Ableton Live*,
through the proprietary software, *Glover*, which generates MIDI
(Musical Instrument Digital Interface) continuous controls (CCs) that
can be assigned in another applications. It can also send data as OSC
(Open Sound Control), text-to-speech, and send feedback to the gloves.
The glove data needs to be calibrated in each session to reset the zero
positions and configure the flex sensor finger data.

Surprisingly, familiarity with another similar system (self-built) did
not meaningfully make the MiMu system easier to master. Mary Mainsbridge
(2016) noted that gestural interface design favours technical and
functional accomplishments over the engagement with the activity and
development of kinaesthetic sensibility which are important in
composition and performance. This demands that the artists have highly
refined proprioceptive skills and body awareness, like dancers.

There is some drift in the IMU (Inertial Measurement Unit) data making
it unpredictable. This can be remedied through a zeroing gesture to
reconfigure the mid-point of the gloves, but that requires spare gesture
slots. Gestures sometimes get mis-recognised with other gestures (for
example, "puppet hand" and fist) and multiple gestures can trigger when
transitioning between gestures. There is no accelerometer/gyroscope
machine learning built into the software, thus requiring additional
software and processing which can be CPU intensive. The proxy for
three-dimensional gesture capture in Glover (for example, a wave)
requires you to visually snapshot positions within the whole of that
movement. It can make it harder to write precisely due to these factors
and requires careful planning in routing the parameters and boundaries.
There is also a small delay in gesture recognition which makes it hard
to take shorter, rhythmic vocal loops and have precise control over
effects. Encountering technical errors mid-performance was not uncommon
and would drag me out of any embodied state during practice.

Gestures cannot be triggered without using the interface and it is a
time-consuming process. In this piece, there was much planning prior to
gesture assignment and during practices technical challenges would arise
and generate barriers to embodied states. In this piece, I used a
relatively simple set of gestures to balance between functionality of
performance and memory capabilities so that I could remain engaged in
the sound control. The laboriousness of routing data does not contribute
to the engagement with the activity and makes it more difficult to get
to the composing stage. It creates many niggling problems to overcome
before one can control the sound. Assuming that one is looking to
facilitate embodiment and interaction with the activity, this presents a
problem.

However, once this process is complete, the interface does enable
embodiment. The physical act of grasping sound and moving it through the
speaker arrangement is tactile and it makes the invisible seem
malleable. Through this process, play and performer agency are
introduced and/or heightened. Additionally, it is a novel and playful
way of interacting with one's voice. A singer is not ordinarily able to
point in a direction to change the panning or raise a fist to add
distortion at will. After the initial loop recordings, there is room for
improvisation which leads the performer back into a space of play and
agency. This is space to react and interact with the sound in the
allotted time. The yaw, pitch, and roll movement whilst holding a closed
fist hand position manipulates audio effects and spatialization of each
loop. This grants a tactile and visual representation of grabbing a
sound to twist and shape it. The manipulation and effects routing leave
room for improvisation within a set piece, enabling flow between
choreographed and free sections, to allow the performer freedom to
immerse themselves in the sound.

The role in expressions of trauma is emerging. So many actions of
psychological trauma are full body postures (slumping, crumpling up,
becoming small). Physical trauma differs by incident site. This
interface would require *Max* (Cycling '74, 2018), *MuBu* (IRCAM, 2014),
and additional custom sensors to accurately capture more psychologically
instigated gestures, and/or further exploration of the bounds of the
*MiMu* system.

Trauma is deeply personal, but also shared and understandable. It is a
multiplicity. Furthermore, songs may have different meanings per
audient. The artist statement and title provide the context for the
audience through the power of suggestion -- which they can still choose
to reject. An alternate reading of the piece might be mental turmoil (an
alternate interpretation offered to me by a listener). The piece might
have a similar impact, but the psychological context of that art would
change. As a personal exploration of trauma, how I engage with the sound
is informed by my narrative and what I know of that traumatic event. The
confusion of electrical signals in the body, uncertainty and
unpredictability through moving sound -- being the personification of
the trauma as a way of externalising it. But this is not a type of
trauma that needs to be reintegrated into myself to exist in the past --
it lives with me and will die with me. More work will be done here in
the larger thesis project.

# Preliminary conclusions {#preliminary-conclusions .First-Level-Headings}

These conclusions were drawn through analysis and review of audio-visual
recordings taken during composition and practice sessions, written notes
about alterations and perceptions during performance, progression of the
compositions form from inception and transference to the *Glover-MiMu*
system (from my self-built system, as part of the technical analysis),
and changes made to the piece and/or the data routing during practice
and composition sessions. They were analysed for evidence of embodiment
(where it was facilitated or hindered) and how they reflected the
autoethnographic narrative (physical trauma and its aftereffects).

The *Glover-MiMu* system has been effective and useable. It is a
convenient way of managing unwieldy sets of gestural data, though it
lacks some creature comforts for ease of routing. The system is costly
reducing its' accessibility to a range of artists. A reduced user base
also reduces feedback and refinement on the system. One might be better
served by building their own WIFI-enabled OSC gloves to work within
Glover's infrastructure. The cost in the alternate solution is shifted
to time.

Does this type of interface and routing encourage or enable an embodied
experience? Yes, but it can be fleeting because of IMU drift, rigorous
preparation demands, and reworking the gesture sets repeatedly while
balancing artistic desire and real-life functionality. Technical issues
interrupt the embodied experience. However, when working as expected,
the ability to paint and malleate a sound environment without physically
touching a computer is powerful and an absorbing activity. Grabbing,
twisting, and twirling (sound) objects operates at a childlike level of
enjoyment. It gives the performer agency when the controls are easy to
decipher, code, and track in performance. In this piece, the most
challenging part is orienting and remaining cognizant of what sound is
which loop and position it is out of the 14 possible loops.

Challenges arise in capturing the full body experience of a traumatic
event because the system uses only gloves. Psychological trauma
manifests through the whole body and may include a full movement (like
crumpling to the floor), not just the hands. Though the title of this
piece could have an alternate meaning, the effect of a soundscape that
exhibits elements of a "wall of noise", electricity, human sounds
manipulated to become inhuman or superhuman can translate effectively
under the subject of frayed nerves as a mental or physical phenomenon.
Gestural language, though, is tricky and elusive as it rubs up against
an impossible goal of universality. Shared trauma, individual trauma,
what is human, and the practicalities of capturing these difficult human
experiences; these are the conundrums informing future works in the
larger thesis project.

# Future Research {#future-research .First-Level-Headings}

Future works will address more confronting topics than the mild maiming
of my left hand. These topics include sexual assault and harassment,
gender discrimination, and the breakdown of body and mind when enduring
long-term traumatic experiences. These pieces will incorporate
trauma-informed therapeutic concepts as I externalize my voice and mold
it with my hands. This could potentially thread into therapeutic uses
such as music therapy and/or Somatic Experiencing (Payne et al., 2015).
More research needs to be conducted here.

Dramatizing a physical injury (although disturbing to describe) is a
"safe" and non-confrontational way to begin engaging with trauma related
material. Most people have had a papercut; there is a relatability
through widely experienced events. Any person that has had dental
trouble might understand how awful nerve pain and pain referral can be.
People engage with art to engage with difficult ideas and for catharsis
(Bicknell, 2014). If you then make them aware that this event could
jeopardize their livelihood, they could feel empathy. This could
potentially build empathy in audiences over a series of works or build
familiarity with one's inner sensations (as in Somatic Experiencing)
over time leading to greater empathy between individuals, societies, and
self. Artists who suffer from unseen chronic illnesses (depression,
chronic fatigue, fibromyalgia, et cetera) or other disabilities could
use gestural control and their own experience to articulate their daily
life, experiences, struggles, and triumphs to elucidate their own
experience. So, intelligent, aware, and hopeful artists might look to
these areas to make meaningful change in society on a larger scale.

# References {#references}

```{=latex}
\begin{hangparas}{1.5em}{1}
```

Ableton. (2020). *Surround Panner* (Ableton 11) \[MacOS\]. Ableton. <https://www.ableton.com/en/packs/surround-panner/>

Ableton. (2021). *Ableton Live 11* (Version 11) \[MacOS\]. Ableton.

Bicknell, J. (2014, September 29). 4 Reasons We Listen to Sad Music, When We're Sad. *Psychology Today*, *Why Music Moves Us*(Online). <http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/why-music-moves-us/201409/4-reasons-we-listen-sad-music-when-were-sad>

Buck, C., Lee, J., Bell, K., Menzel, I., \& Groff, J. (2013, December 6).
*Frozen* \[Animation, Adventure, Comedy\]. Walt Disney Animation
Studios, Walt Disney Pictures.

Candy, L. (2006). *Practice Based Research: A Guide* (CCS No. 2006-V1.0
November; Creativity \& Cognition Studios, p. 19). University of
Technology.

Cycling '74. (2018). *Max MSP* (Version 8) \[MacOS\]. Cycling '74.

Davidson, J. W., \& Salgado Correia, J. (2001). Meaningful musical
performance: A bodily experience. *Research Studies in Music Education*,
*17*(1), 70--83. <https://doi.org/10.1177/1321103X010170011301>

Dewey, J. (1934). *Art as Experience*. Capricorn Books.
<https://sites.evergreen.edu/danceasart/wp-content/uploads/sites/124/2015/09/Art-as-Experience-ch.1.pdf>

Höök, K. (2018). *Designing with the Body: Somaesthetic Interaction
Design*. MIT Press. <https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/11481.001.0001>

IRCAM. (2014). *MuBu*. IRCAM. <http://ismm.ircam.fr/mubu/>

Kolk, B. van der. (2014). *The Body Keeps the Score: Mind, Brain and
Body in the Transformation of Trauma*. Penguin UK.

Levine, P. A. (2015). *Trauma and Memory: Brain and Body in a Search for
the Living Past: A Practical Guide for Understanding and Working with
Traumatic Memory*. North Atlantic Books.

Mainsbridge, M. (2016). *Body as instrument: An exploration of gestural
interface design* \[Thesis\].
<https://opus.lib.uts.edu.au/handle/10453/43474>

Mainsbridge, M. (2018). Gestural systems for the voice: Performance
approaches and repertoire. *Digital Creativity*, *29*(4), 315--331.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/14626268.2018.1541181>

Mäkelä, M. (2007). Knowing Through Making: The Role of the Artefact in
Practice-led Research. *Knowledge, Technology \& Policy*, *20*(3),
157--163. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s12130-007-9028-2>

MI.MU Gloves Ltd. (2010). *MiMu* \[Control Interface\].
<https://mimugloves.com/>

MI.MU Gloves Ltd. (2022). *Glover* (1.1.1) \[MacOS\]. MI.MU Gloves Ltd.

Payne, P., Levine, P. A., \& Crane-Godreau, M. A. (2015). Somatic
experiencing: Using interoception and proprioception as core elements of
trauma therapy. *Frontiers in Psychology*, *6*.
<https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00093>

Schön, D. A. (1983). *The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals
Think in Action*. Routledge. <https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315237473>

Soddell, T. (2019). *A dense mass of indecipherable fear: The
experiential (non)narration of trauma and madness through Acousmatic
sound*. <https://researchbank.rmit.edu.au/view/rmit:162786>

Spry, T. (2011). *Body, Paper, Stage: Writing and Performing
Autoethnography*. Routledge.
<http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/unimelb/detail.action?docID=843865>

Stojanović, D. (2015). The inscription of the feminine body in the field
of sound: Vocal expression as a platform of feminine writing (écriture
féminine). *Muzikologija*, *18*, 115--129.
<https://doi.org/10.2298/MUZ1518115S>

Sullivan, G. L. (2009). Making space: The purpose and place of
practice-led research. *Practice-Led Research, Research-Led Practice in
the Creative Arts*, 41--65.

```{=latex}
\end{hangparas}
```